National Basketball Association Most Valuable Player Prediction Model
Robert Shea, Department of Systems Engineering and Engineering Management, Stevens Institute of Technology, Castle Point on Hudson, Hoboken, NJ, USA
	The National Basketball Association MVP award is an annual award given to the best performing player of the regular season. The voters of the award each have their own methods of determining the value of a player and whether they are deserving of MVP. In general, the merit for the decision for the recipient of the MVP award is highly subjective and there is a significant amount of open-ended definition of a player’s value. The most prevalent arguments are that the player is the best player on the best team or that the player is putting up historical statistics. These two arguments were used to create a model that would evaluate the value of top MVP candidates according to their contribution to team wins and overall individual output. It is arguably impossible to put an objective truth on value on such a subjective award however the goal is to look at consistent statistics that demonstrate player success and value for the top NBA candidates over the past ten seasons. A numerical value assignment of a player’s value will hopefully make the decision more obvious as to who is more deserving of the MVP award. Current models that measure value have issues such as unjustified weightings of variables, the overvaluing of “big men”, or the undervaluing of a player’s defensive ability. The newer model includes more metrics to measure an individual’s adeptness and success such as Player Efficiency Rating and Game Score. These newer metrics aim to offset the overvaluing of big men and balance the player’s contribution to team wins with the player’s overall individual input without using arbitrary scalar values. In addition, the weighting for Net Rating was increased to investigate whether this would have a positive effect for better defensive players. However, the metric in its current state does not consider certain intangibles such as a player’s true defensive ability or player narrative. The introduction of newer defensive advanced metrics in the future could be modified into the metric to add more value to better defensive players.
